docs(api): liquid classes in 8.5 (#18619)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: api/docs/v2/liquid_classes.rst

        **Aspirate flow rate**
      - The pipette aspirates liquid at this speed.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/flow_rate_dispense.png
        **Dispense flow rate**
      - The pipette dispenses liquid at this speed.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/retract_position.png
        **Retract position**
      - The pipette retracts from the liquid and moves to this position.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/retract_speed.png
        **Retract speed**
      - The pipette retracts from the liquid at the specified speed.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/push_out.png
        **Push out**
      - The pipette dispenses a small amount of air to ensure all liquid leaves the tip.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/touch_tip.png
        **Touch tip**
      - The pipette touches the attached tip to the sides of a well to remove droplets.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/air_gap.png
        **Air gap**
      - The pipette aspirates a small amount of air after an aspirate or dispense.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/blow_out.png
        **Blow out**
      - The pipette dispenses a larger amount of air to ensure all liquid leaves the tip.

> A :ref:`liquid class definition <liquid-class-definitions>` specifies values for each property. When your Flex protocol includes a liquid class, these property values automatically define transfer behavior. For example, if you use `.InstrumentContext.transfer_with_liquid_class` to transfer a viscous liquid, the pipette submerges into the liquid and aspirates more slowly to prevent air bubbles from forming. 

Reviewer: Double-backticks for mono. And can omit class.
```suggestion
A :ref:`liquid class definition <liquid-class-definitions>` specifies values for each property. When your Flex protocol includes a liquid class, these property values automatically define transfer behavior. For example, if you use ``.transfer_with_liquid_class`` to transfer a viscous liquid, the pipette submerges into the liquid and aspirates more slowly to prevent air bubbles from forming. 
```

> Properties marked with an asterisk, as shown above, are determined by your pipette, tip, and volumbe combinations. For more information, see :ref:`liquid-class-definitions`. 

Reviewer: Oops, lost the asterisks in the table conversion. I think it would be cleaner to put an extra sentence in the relevant descriptions: "Varies by volume."

Also typo 😇 
```suggestion
Properties marked with an asterisk, as shown above, are determined by your pipette, tip, and volume combinations. For more information, see :ref:`liquid-class-definitions`. 
```

Author: I like this. Added a sentence to each of the relevant descriptions and removed this section underneath the table.

.. _selecting-a-liquid-class:

> Selecting a Liquid Class

Reviewer: I think we should call this section something like "Using Liquid Classes". The primary rationale for this is that we need to be accurate in telling protocol authors what they need to do in their code. "Select" is not accurate enough, because that's not a verb used for describing Python code. What they need to do is:
- Call `get_liquid_class()` and save its result to a variable.
- Pass that variable as the `liquid_class` argument of one of the liquid handling methods.

That also counsels in favor of removing the next section header. After all, doing the transfer is the whole point of "using" a liquid class.

Start by definining the tips, trash, pipette, and labware used in your transfers. Then, use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.get_liquid_class` to select an Opentrons-verified liquid class.

.. code-block:: python
    :substitutions: 

    from opentrons import protocol_api

    requirements = {"robotType": "Flex", "apiLevel": "|2.23|"}

    # define tips, trash, and pipette
    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        tiprack1 = protocol_context.load_labware("opentrons_flex_96_tiprack_50ul", "D3")
        trash = protocol_context.load_trash_bin("A3")
        pipette_50 = protocol_context.load_instrument("flex_1channel_50", "left, tip_racks=[tiprack1]")
    
    # load source and destination labware
        nest_plate = protocol_context.load_labware("nest_96_wellplate_200ul_flat", "C3")
        arma_plate = protocol_context.load_labware("armadillo_96_wellplate_200ul_pcr_full_skirt","C2")

    # select liquid classes to use in your protocol
        liquid_1 = protocol_context.get_liquid_class("glycerol_50")
        liquid_2 = protocol_context.get_liquid_class("ethanol_80")

>         liquid_3 = protocol_context.get_liquid_class("glycerol_50")

Reviewer: I think it does make sense to show this as a full protocol, rather than zooming in to just the liquid class methods, since the choice of pipette and tip rack matter. But there are several things we can improve about this code block.
- Use named arguments throughout, like in our example protocols. This is the first time we're showing the new methods, so it's extra important to show what their argument names are.
- Use standard labware variable names, like in the examples. We typically load `plate` and `reservoir` and those should be sufficient here. We don't need two plates (much less two brands of plate, including one that we've deprecated use of).
- Define just one liquid class to start. I get that this shows that you can load the same base class into multiple variables, but that's not important right now. I would suggest something like `viscous_liquid` as the variable name.
- We should have a ``.. versionadded: 2.24`` statement here (and after every code block that uses a new feature for the first time).

Nitpicks:
- Make sure the comments are properly scoped. Defining tips, trash, pipette is _inside_ the run function, but the comment is outside.
- `black`en everything to a width of 76 characters. I suggest [this interactive formatter](https://black.vercel.app/?version=stable&state=_Td6WFoAAATm1rRGAgAhARYAAAB0L-Wj4ACCAEFdAD2IimZxl1N_W1ktIvcnCRyzdOKw6gNqJh-6ppEYHKUOr5C6lbAQvPnT9SliP1HcoyNmCvuCfNP0jHwLuRrFtwIAAAAAAKSaztkG_bB-AAFdgwEAAADTYr89scRn-wIAAAAABFla).

Author: in progress.

> You'll need to add a label, like ``liquid_1``, to liquid classes in your protocol. This helps you keep track of multiple liquids of the same class in a protocol. It's also required by ``transfer_with_liquid_class()``, instead of a liquid class load name like ``glycerol_50``. 

Reviewer: This is not just a label, this is the name for instantiating a variable. And an important nuance is that `get_liquid_class()` takes into account the loaded pipettes and tip racks in terms of the liquid class properties it returns for storing in that variable.

Then you can move right along to explaining the transfer. And as part of introducing it we can say that it requires this stored set of properties, not a load name. And to drive home that load names are just strings, include quotation marks: ``"glycerol_50"``.

Author: definitely an important call out. Took a stab at new text in this section and below.

Opentrons-verified liquid class definitions are based on Flex pipette and tip combinations. The API will raise an error if you try to perform a liquid class transfer with an OT-2 pipette and tips. 

In the example below, a Flex P50 1-channel pipette will transfer 50 µL of your viscous ``liquid_1`` from each well of the  source plate to each well of the destination plate. A new tip is used for each well transfer, and each tip is dropped in the trash bin loaded in slot A3. 

.. code-block:: python

    pipette_50.transfer_with_liquid_class(
        liquid_class=liquid_1,
        volume=50,
        source=nest_plate.rows()[0],
        dest=arma_plate.rows()[0],
        new_tip="always",
        trash_location=trash
    )

Here, the ``glycerol_50`` viscous liquid class definition accounts for all other transfer behavior, like flow rate, whether or not to add an air gap or delay, and submerge and retract speeds. For each aspirate, the pipette: 

> * Moves to the submerge start position of 2 mm above the top of the source well at 4 mm/sec.
> * Submerges into ``liquid_1`` at 4 mm/sec to the aspirate start position of 2 mm above the bottom of the well. 
> * Aspirates 50 µL of ``liquid_1`` at 50 µL/sec with a correction by volume of -0.2 µL. 
> * Delays for 1 sec after aspirating. 
> * Moves to the retract position of 2 mm above the top of the well at 4 mm/sec. 

Reviewer: I think it will be best to tighten these up as much as possible. 
```suggestion
* Moves to 2 mm above the top of the source well at 4 mm/sec.
* Submerges to 2 mm above the bottom of the source well at 4 mm/sec. 
* Aspirates 50 µL at 50 µL/sec with a correction of -0.2 µL. 
* Delays for 1 second. 
* Retracts to 2 mm above the top of the well at 4 mm/sec. 
```
And so on in the following lists.

And for each dispense, the pipette: 

* Moves to the submerge start position of 2 mm above the top of the destination well at 4 mm/sec. 
* Moves to the dispense position of 2 mm above the top of the destination well at 4 mm/sec. 
* Dispense 50 µL of ``liquid_1`` at 25 µL/sec with a correction by volume of -0.2 µL. 
* Pushes out a volume of air equivalent to 3.9 µL to ensure all liquid leaves the tip, and delays for 0.5 sec afterward. 
* Moves to the retract position of 2 mm above the top of the well at 4 mm/sec. 

In many cases, the liquid class definition represents fine-tuned changes optimized for each liquid class. If you instead use the Flex P50 1-channel pipette to transfer 50 µL of the volatile ``liquid_2``, transfer behavior would include: 
* Submerging into and retracting from the volatile ``liquid_2`` at 100 mm/sec.
* Adding larger air gaps after aspirating *and* dispensing to prevent dripping onto the deck.
* Aspirating and dispensing at 30 µL/sec with a larger correction by volume. 
* Pushing out a larger volume of air to ensure all liquid leaves the tip. 

> Not all transfer behavior is easily visible. See :ref:`liquid-class-definitions` for a full list of changes based on liquid class, pipette, and tip combination. For more detail on individual transfer settings, see :ref:`liquid-control`. 

Reviewer: I like this!

.. _customizing-liquid-classes:

Customizing Liquid Classes
===========================

You can create your own liquid class to customize transfer behavior for any liquid in a Flex protocol. To make changes, you can:
* Edit individual properties of an existing liquid class, or 

> * Add properties to a new liquid class. 

Reviewer: Short enough that a list isn't needed here.

To customize an Opentrons-verified liquid class, use :py:meth:`InstrumentContext.define_liquid_class` to define your custom liquid class after adding your pipettes, tips, trash, and labware::

    requirements = {"robotType": "Flex", "apiLevel": "2.24"}

    def run(protocol_context):
       tiprack = protocol_context.load_labware("opentrons_96_tiprack_20ul", "A2")
       pipette_20 = protocol_context.load_instrument("p20_single_gen2", mount="left", tip_racks=[tiprack])
       trash = protocol_context.load_trash_bin("A3")
       nest_plate = protocol_context.load_labware("nest_96_wellplate_200ul_flat", "B1")

>        arma_plate = protocol_context.load_labware("armadillo_96_wellplate_200ul_pcr_full_skirt", "B2")

Reviewer: Let's skip the preamble to the protocol this time.

    ## customize based on the aqueous liquid class
    custom_water = protocol_context.define_liquid_class(
        name="custom_water",

>         properties=custom_liquid_class_properties,

Reviewer: How does this connect to `custom_water_props` below?  It looks entirely disconnected, so if this does propagate back up to the liquid class through some Python magic, we should point that out clearly. We should check with @sanni-t on this and confirm that the code simulates on current `chore_release-8.5.0`.

Reviewer: Took another look at this example code, and for scope purposes, `custom_liquid_class_properties` is defined _outside_ of `run()`. If this is necessary, we need to emphasize it. If it's not, and it would work to define that variable inside `run()` (before this call, obviously), that would be more in line with our typical examples.

Author: Have been simulating code this morning. Looks like a nested dictionary is required (I run into errors when I don't have one). 

And, the code simulates with `custom_liquid_class_properties` defined inside OR outside of `run()`...

Author: Spent quite a bit of time simulating code and revamping this section. Can come back to it after a second read through if we need further details.

        base_liquid_class="aqueous",
        display_name="Custom Water",
    )

Next, edit indivual liquid class properties based on your Flex pipette and tip combination. 

.. code-block:: python

    # access aqueous liquid class properties for the Flex 1-ch. pipette and tips
    custom_water_props = custom_water.get_for(pipette_20, tiprack)
    
    # edit aspirate submerge speed
    custom_water_props.aspirate.submerge.speed = 80

    # edit aspirate flow rate by volume for 10 μL and 20 μL volumes
    custom_water_props.aspirate.flow_rate_by_volume = [(10.0, 40.0), (20.0, 30.0)]

    # edit to delay before an aspirate
    custom_water_props.aspirate.delay = {"enabled": True} 

> You can also create a new liquid class for your Flex protocols. Instead of using an Opentrons-verified ``base_liquid_class``, you'll start from scratch, providing a value for `every required property <https://github.com/Opentrons/opentrons/blob/edge/shared-data/liquid-class/schemas/1.json>` in your liquid class. 

Reviewer: Fix link syntax.
```suggestion
You can also create a new liquid class for your Flex protocols. Instead of using an Opentrons-verified ``base_liquid_class``, you'll start from scratch, providing a value for `every required property <https://github.com/Opentrons/opentrons/blob/edge/shared-data/liquid-class/schemas/1.json>`__ in your liquid class. 
```

.. code-block:: python

 # add all required properties, like aspirate properties, for the pipette, tip rack, and liquid class
    custom_liquid_class_properties = {
       "p20_single_gen2": {
          "opentrons/opentrons_96_tiprack_20ul/1": {
              "aspirate": {
                 "aspirate_position": {
                    "offset": {"x": 1, "y": 2, "z": 3},
                    "position_reference": "well-bottom",

>                 }

Reviewer: Need to clarify that code is truncated here. Should probably end the code block, so readers don't copy and try to run it all (because it will fail with a syntax error).

Author: Changed this section to make it clearer that this is _not _ a complete example. See what you think, especially now that I define `custom_liquid_class_properties` before naming the class. I think it probably could still be clearer.

      -  
        - The pipette aspirates a small amount of air after an aspirate or dispense.
        - Varies by volume.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/blow_out.png
      
        **Blow out**
      - The pipette dispenses a larger amount of air to ensure all liquid leaves the tip.

A :ref:`liquid class definition <liquid-class-definitions>` specifies values for each property. When your Flex protocol includes a liquid class, these property values automatically define transfer behavior. For example, if you use ``.transfer_with_liquid_class`` to transfer a viscous liquid, the pipette submerges into the liquid and aspirates more slowly to prevent air bubbles from forming. 
 

.. _using-liquid-classes:

Using Liquid Classes
======================

You'll use a :ref:`liquid class definition <liquid-class-definitions>` in your protocol to optimize transfer behavior based on liquid properties, along with your chosen Flex pipettes and tips. 

Start by definining the tips, trash, pipette, and labware used in your transfers. Then, use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.get_liquid_class` to select an Opentrons-verified liquid class.

.. code-block:: python
    :substitutions: 

>     from opentrons import protocol_api
> 
>     requirements = {"robotType": "Flex", "apiLevel": "|2.24|"}
> 
>     # define tips, trash, and pipette
>     def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
>         tiprack = protocol.load_labware(
>             load_name="opentrons_flex_96_tiprack_50ul", location="D3"
>         )
>         trash = protocol.load_trash_bin(location="A3")
>         pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
>             instrument_name="flex_1channel_50",
>             mount="left",
>             tip_racks=[tiprack],
>         )
> 
>     # load source and destination labware
>        reservoir = protocol.load_labware(
>            load_name="nest_12_reservoir_15ml", location="C3"
>         )
>         plate = protocol.load_labware(
>             load_name="nest_96_wellplate_200ul_flat", location="C2"
>         )
> 
>     # select liquid class to use in your protocol
>         viscous_liquid = protocol.get_liquid_class(name="glycerol_50")

Reviewer: couple errors in this code block (it won't simulate)
```suggestion
    from opentrons import protocol_api

    requirements = {"robotType": "Flex", "apiLevel": "|apiLevel|"}

    # define tips, trash, and pipette
    def run(protocol: protocol_api.ProtocolContext):
        tiprack = protocol.load_labware(
            load_name="opentrons_flex_96_tiprack_50ul", location="D3"
        )
        trash = protocol.load_trash_bin(location="A3")
        pipette = protocol.load_instrument(
            instrument_name="flex_1channel_50",
            mount="left",
            tip_racks=[tiprack],
        )

    # load source and destination labware
        reservoir = protocol.load_labware(
           load_name="nest_12_reservoir_15ml", location="C3"
        )
        plate = protocol.load_labware(
            load_name="nest_96_wellplate_200ul_flat", location="C2"
        )

    # select liquid class to use in your protocol
        viscous_liquid = protocol.get_liquid_class(name="glycerol_50")
```

.. versionadded:: 2.24

> Use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.get_liquid_class` to name the Opentrons-verified liquid class you'll use in the protocol. :py:meth:`~.get_liquid_class` also takes into account pipettes and tipracks in your protocol to define transfer behavior. 

Reviewer 2: Is this a repeat of the above command?

Reviewer: Yeah, it's a little redundant. Some of the details could be combined into the ¶ above the code sample.
```
Start by definining the tips, trash, pipette, and labware used in your transfers. Then, use :py:meth:`.ProtocolContext.get_liquid_class` to select an Opentrons-verified liquid class and save its results to a variable. ``get_liquid_class()`` takes into account the pipettes and tip racks in your protocol and only loads the relevant portion of the liquid class definition.
```

Author: Good call. Updated with Ed's suggestion.

:og:description: How to select and apply transfer behavior optimized for liquid classes in Opentrons protocols. 

.. _liquid-classes: 

****************
Liquid Classes
****************

Accounting for properties of liquids in your protocol can increase pipetting accuracy on the Flex. For example, a slower flow rate can improve pipetting for a viscous liquid, and an air gap can prevent a volatile liquid from dripping onto the deck. 

This section covers:
* Opentrons-verified liquid classes and their optimized properties, like flow rate.
* Selecting and using a liquid class in a Flex protocol.

> * Customizing a liquid class for your workflow. 

Reviewer: Fix RST syntax for list. Or better yet, shorten the text and don't use a list:
```suggestion
This page covers the properties of Opentrons-verified liquid classes, how to use a verified liquid class in your protocol, and how to customize a liquid class. 
```

.. _opentrons-verified-liquid-classes: 

Opentrons-verified Liquid Classes
=================================

> Opentrons-verified liquid classes are based on the properties of common liquids: 

Reviewer: I would add those liquid names here, then let the table stand alone.
```suggestion
Opentrons-verified liquid classes are based on the properties of common liquids: water, ethanol, and glycerol.
```

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Opentrons-verified liquid class
      - Description
      - Load name
    * - Aqueous
      -
        * Based on deionized water

>         * The system default

Reviewer: This might be too strong. `transfer()` etc. are optimized for aqueous liquids, but are not identical to using the aqueous liquid class. Nor is it a default in the sense that you can call `transfer_with_liquid_class()` and leave the liquid class unspecified to get aqueous-style behavior.

Author: This is a good call. Removing "the system default" here- the only place I use that language in this article, and will check `liquid_class_definitions.rst` too.

      - ``water``
    * - Volatile
      - Based on 80% ethanol
      - ``ethanol_80``
    * - Viscous
      - Based on 50% glycerol
      - ``glycerol_50``

> Use an Opentrons-verified liquid class in your transfers to automatically apply optimized behavior. For example, choosing the ``glycerol_50`` liquid class changes *properties*, like flow rate, to accurately transfer viscous liquid. 

Reviewer: I would remove the emphasis on "properties".

    * - Property
      - Description
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/submerge_position.png

        **Submerge position**
      - The pipette begins at this position above the liquid.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/submerge_speed.png

        **Submerge speed**
      - The pipette submerges into the liquid at this speed.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/delay_after_submerge.png

        **Delay after submerging**
      - The pipette delays a specified amount of time:

        - before submerging into or retracting from liquid.
        - before or after an aspirate or dispense.
        - after a push out.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/mix.png

        **Mix liquid**
      - The pipette mixes liquid inside the well before an aspirate or after a dispense.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/prewet_tip.png

        **Pre-wet tip**
      - The pipette pre-wets the attached tip before aspirating liquid.
    * - .. image:: ../img/lc_icons/flow_rate_aspirate.png

        **Aspirate flow rate**
      - The pipette aspirates liquid at this speed.

>       - Varies by volume.

Reviewer: i think you're trying to make a cell-internal list. but this is at the same level as the list-table formatting. this makes sphinx angry. i can't suggest on unmodified lines, but it should look like this:
```
        **Aspirate flow rate**
      - 
        - The pipette aspirates liquid at this speed.
        - Varies by volume.
```

Author: Gahhhh thank you!
